<center>Math/Stat 733 : Theory of Probability I</center>  
<center>Notebook</center>
<center>Zijie Zhang </center>

- [Overview](#overview)
  - [Basic Information](#basic-information)
  - [Textbook](#textbook)
    - [Extra Reading](#extra-reading)
  - [Course content](#course-content)
  - [Evaluation](#evaluation)
- [Introduction](#introduction)
  - [What is probability theory?](#what-is-probability-theory)
  - [Simple example with built in symmetry](#simple-example-with-built-in-symmetry)
- [Lecture 1](#lecture-1)
  - [Kolmogorov's axioms(1933)](#kolmogorovs-axioms1933)
  - [Probability Space ($\Omega, \mathscr{F}, \mathbb{P}$)](#probability-space-omega-mathscrf-mathbbp)
  - [Def of a $\sigma$-field(or $\sigma$-algebra)](#def-of-a-sigma-fieldor-sigma-algebra)
  - [Probability measure](#probability-measure)
    - [Examples:](#examples)
- [Lecture 2](#lecture-2)
  - [Word Problem:](#word-problem)
    - [Ex: We roll two dice](#ex-we-roll-two-dice)
    - [Examples:](#examples-1)


><center>2020/08/29/Saturday === Create Notebook</center>

# Overview
## Basic Information
**Meetings:** TR 1pm-2:15pm (online)  
**Instructor:** Benedek Valkó  
**Email:** <valko@math.wisc.edu>  
**Office hours:** Tu 4-5pm, F 3-4pm, or by appointment (online)

## Textbook
_Richard Durrett: Probability: Theory and Examples, 5th edition, 2019_  
### Extra Reading
* Olav Kallenberg: Foundations of Modern Probability. 2nd edition, Springer, 2002
* William Feller. An introduction to probability theory and its applications. Vol. I. Third edition. John Wiley and Sons Inc., New York, 1968.
* David Williams. Probability with martingales. Cambridge Mathematical Textbooks. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1991.
* Patrick Billingsley. Probability and measure. Wiley Series in Probability and Mathematical Statistics. John Wiley \& Sons Inc., New York, 1995.

## Course content
We cover selected portions of Chapters 1-4 of Durrett. This is a rough course outline:  
* Weeks 1-2: Foundations, properties of probability spaces
* Independence, 0-1 laws, strong law of large numbers
* Characteristic functions, weak convergence and the central limit theorem
* Conditional expectation, Martingales  
The course continues in the spring semester as Math 734 covering topics such as Markov chains, stationary processes, ergodic theory, and Brownian motion.

## Evaluation
Course grades will be based on **biweekly**
* home work assignments (25%)
* class participation (15%)
* midterm exam (30%)
* final exam (30%)  
See the _Canvas_ page for more information  

><center>Updated on 2020/08/29/Saturday</center>
- - - -
><center>2020/09/03/Thursday</center>

# Introduction
Upload Homework 1 on Canvas before Sep 13.  
* Midterm exam and final exam, open book.
* Midterm is evening exam.
* Textbook is _Richard Durrett: Probability: Theory and Examples, 5th edition, 2019_.
* Lecture Notes will be uploaded.

## What is probability theory?
**Goal:** model uncertain events, quantify...  
## Simple example with built in symmetry
1. Filp a fair coin. What's the probability of tails?  
   Normal average : $\frac{1}{2}$  
2. We filp a fair coin 10 times. 
   What's the probability of getting 10 tails?  $\frac{1}{2^{10}}$  
   $2^{10}$ outcomes, each outcome : a sequence of H/T  
3. Dartboard with radius 10in, bull's seye: a disc of radius 1in.  
   We throw a dart at the board. What's the probability of hitting the bull's eye? $\frac{1}{100}$  
...

# Lecture 1
## Kolmogorov's axioms(1933)
## Probability Space ($\Omega, \mathscr{F}, \mathbb{P}$)
* $\Omega$: sample space
* $\mathscr{F}$: set of events
* $\mathbb{P}$: probability measure on $\mathscr{F}$
## Def of a $\sigma$-field(or $\sigma$-algebra)
1. If $A \in \mathscr{F}$ then $A^c \in \mathscr{F}$
2. If $A_i \in \mathscr{F}, i\in \mathbb{N}$ then $\cup_i A_i \in \mathscr{F}$  
$\emptyset \in \mathscr{F}, \ \Omega \in \mathscr{F}$  
If $\mathscr{F}_i, i \in \mathcal{I}$ on $\Omega$ then $\cap \mathscr{F}_i$ is also a $\sigma$-field.  

Suppose that $\mathscr{A}$ is a non-empty set of subsets of $\Omega$. Then there is a smaller $\sigma$-field that contains $\mathscr{A}$ as a subset.  
$\sigma(\mathscr{A})$: $\sigma$-field generated by $\mathscr{A}$.  
*Proof* : Collect all $\sigma$-field $\mathscr{F}_i$ on $\Omega$ with $\mathscr{A} \subset \mathscr{F}_i$.  
Then $\sigma(\mathscr{A}) = \cap_i \mathscr{F}_i$.  
$2^{\Omega}$ is a $\sigma$-field so the intersection is non-empty.&#8718;
## Probability measure
1. $\mathbb{P}$ : $\mathscr{F} \to [0,1]$  
   $\mathbb{P}(\emptyset)=0$.
2. $\mathscr{A}_i \in \mathscr{F}, \ i \in \mathbb{N}$ disjoint  
   $\mathbb{P}(\cup_i \mathscr{A}_i)=\sum_i \mathbb{P}(\mathscr{A}_i)$  
   $\mathbb{P}$ is $\sigma$-additive.
3. $\mathbb{P}(\Omega)=1$.  
Events are elements of $\mathscr{F}$. These are the sets that we can measure with $\mathbb{P}$.

$A_i, A_2, \cdots, A_n$ are disjoint events $\mathbb{P}(\cup_{i=1}^n A_i)=\sum_{i=1}^n \mathbb{P}(A_i)$.($\emptyset$ is disjoint from any other set).

If $\Omega$ is **finite** or **countable infinite** then usually we can take $\mathscr{F}=2^{\Omega}$.

### Examples:
1. Flipping a fair coin  
   $\Omega = {H, T}$  
   $\mathscr{F} = \{\emptyset, \Omega, \{H\}, \{T\}\}$  
   $\mathbb{P}(\{H\}) =\frac{1}{2}$, $\mathbb{P}(\{T\}) =\frac{1}{2}$  
   $\mathbb{P}(\emptyset) =0$, $\mathbb{P}(\Omega) =1$
2. Rolling a fair die  
   $\Omega = \{1,2,3,4,5,6\}$  
   $\mathscr{F} = 2^{\Omega}$  
   $\left|\mathscr{F}\right|=2^6$  
   $\mathbb{P}(\{\epsilon\}) = \frac{1}{6}$, $1\leqslant \epsilon \leqslant 6$  
   $A \in \mathscr{F}$, $\mathbb{P}(A) = \frac{\#A}{6}$
3. Random experiment with $n$ equally likely outcomes  
   $\left|\Omega\right|=n$  
   $\Omega = \{\omega_1, \omega_2, \cdots, \omega_n\}$  
   $\mathscr{F} = 2^{\Omega}$  
   $\mathbb{P}\{\omega_i\} = \frac{1}{n}$, $1 \leqslant i \leqslant n$  
   $\mathbb{P}(A) = \frac{|A|}{|\Omega|}$, $A \subset \Omega$
4. More generally:  
   discrete probability space, $\Omega$ is **finite** or **countable infinite**  
   $\Omega = \{\omega_1, \omega_2, \cdots, \omega_n\}$  
   $\mathbb{P}\{\omega_i\} = p_i$  
   $\mathbb{P}(A) = \sum_{\omega_i\in A}\mathbb{P}(\{\omega_i\})$  
   $\mathscr{F} = 2^{\Omega}$  

><center>Updated on 2020/09/03</center>
 - - - -
><center>2020/09/08/Tuesday</center>
# Lecture 2
## Word Problem:
1. Identify $(\Omega, \mathscr{F}, \mathbb{P})$
2. Identify the event in question
3. Try to compute $\mathbb{P}(event)$.
### Ex: We roll two dice
What's the probility that the sum is even?
$\Omega = \{(a_1,a_2): 1 \leqslant a_i \leqslant 6\}$  
$\mathscr{F}=2^\Omega$, $\mathbb{P}:\mathscr{F}\to (0,1]$  
$\mathbb{P}(\{(a_1,a_2)\}) = \frac{1}{36}$  
$\# \Omega = 36$, $A = \{the\ sum\ is\ even\} = \{(a_1, a_2): 1\leqslant a_i \leqslant 6, a_1+a_2 \ is\ even\}$.  
$\mathbb{P}(A) = \sum_{(a_1,a_2)\in A} \mathbb{P}(\{(a_1,a_2)\}) = \frac{\# A}{36}$.
### Examples:
1. If $\Omega$ is finite or countable infinite (nonempty). If all all singleterms are events then $\mathbb{P}$ can be described via the probabilities of the singleterms.  
   $\Omega = \{\omega_1, \omega_2, \cdots\}$, $\mathbb{P}_\epsilon = \mathbb{P}(\{\omega_\epsilon\})\in [0,1]$, $\sum_{\epsilon} \mathbb{P}_\epsilon = 1$.
2. A uniformly chosen number on $[0,1]$.  
   $\Omega = [0,1]$, $\mathscr{F} = ?$ intervals should be included.  
   $\mathbb{P}([a,b]) = b-a, 0 \leqslant a \leqslant b \leqslant 1$.  
   $\mathscr{F} = $ $\sigma$-field generated by the intervals (set of Borel sets in [0,1])  
   $\mathbb{P}$: **Lebesgue measure**
   $$([0,1], \mathscr{B}, \mathbb{P})$$

More general version:  
Let
   
   
 
><center>Updated on 2020/09/08</center>